##Midterm Advice

- You must be very fluent in ARM assembly
- The solutions to the midterm will NOT be posted

##Slide 12

- Interconnection Network: Circuit needed to transfer information between processor,
memory unit and various number of I/O devices

- A system bus is one example of an interconnection network

- Bus consists of 3 signals: Address, Data, Control

- I/O Devices connect to bus via I/O interface

##Slide 13

- What you see is an I/O interface. 

- The address decoder reads address lines.

- Control circuitry interacts with control signals.

##Slide 14

**Address Decoder**
- Essentially identifies if I/O device is written for or not
- Determines if I/O address is spoken to
- We have to use part of the address

##Slide 15

**Address Decoding**

- Given a memory map, it is possible which address signals uniquely identify
to a particular device

- Ex. Each of these have their own memory maps. Only look at significant bit if it's 0
then any communication with that address is going to main memory.

##Slide 16

**Address Signals Used by the Devices**

- Given a memory map, it is also possible to determine the address signals used by the
device once it has been enabled

##Slide 18

**Bus Operation**

- A bus requires a set of rules known as **bus protocol**

- This governs how the bus is used by devices and is implemented using control signals

- **Bus Control Lines**:

1. Specificy whether operation is Read/Write
2. Size of the operation (ex. byte,word,etc.)
3. Timing information: When processor and I/O may place data or receive data from data lines

- Two broad schemes for timing of data transfers over bus

- **Synchronous:** Global clock
- **Asynchronous:** No global clock

##Slide 19

** Basic Terminology **

- A master is the device that initiates data transfers by issuing Read/Write commands on bus
- A slave is the device addressed by the master

- X places Y on bus: X asserts/de-asserts signals (that amount to value Y) on the bus signals
- Bus signals could be **address, command, or data**

- **Skew:** Occurs when two signals transmitted simultaneously from one source arrive at the
destination at different times.

- Happens due to different lines having different propagation speeds

##Slide 20

** Synchronous Bus **

- Synchronous means that all devices derive their timing information from the bus clock.

- The address and data lines show both high and low signals. This is typical because address
and data lines are multiple bit signals

- Unreliable part of the signal. Sampling here may result in erroneous data.

