##One-Pass Assembling

- It won't know how to generate offset.
- If you can't synthesize in one pass - do it in multiple passes


##Linkers and Loaders

- You will probably have multiple modules

- Linker: What is the exact offset I need to put to ensure that the code continues in module?

- Use linker to link files into one executable

- **Position independent code:** Code that does not change based on location

Ex. Relative addressing, instructions

- **Position dependent code:** Code that does change based on location

Ex. references to external labels

- You use tools to explicity manage where address are as they change.

- When would you prefer position indep. code? Sometimes you have no choice. If you have multiple
libraries spaced so far apart that you have to use it.

## Chapter 3: Accessing Input / Output Devices

- Interconnection Network: Essentially circuitry to communicate between components

Ex. Connects CPU with I/O Devices and Memory Devices

- Different organizations on interconnection network. We will focus on BUS's

- BUS's don't scale very well - ex. 256 cores on CPU, then BUS doesn't work

- If there is 256 cores trying to receive access to BUS it won't work

##Memory Map I/O

- Describes the partitioning of address space for code

- Equivalent to accessing memory

- Don't want address ranges to overlap

- I/O Device interface is circuit between a device and the interconnection network

- CPU views registers as memory addresses

- registers are physically inside the interface say for the keyboard or for the display

##Interacting with I/O

- program controlled I/O: you have a piece of software that does everything it needs to do to execute action req.

ex. keyboard - CPU recognizes keyboard press - echo it to screen - and then tells keyboard i'm ready for next key

- interrupt-driven I/O:

- Signalling: well defined - communication protocol to send ready bits

##Signaling Protocol for I/O Devices

- Keyboard device

1. Indicate that character can be read (device ready to send)
2. Then processor uses Load to access data register

- Display device

1. Indicates that character can be sent (device ready to receive)
2. So, processor uses Store to access Display's data register

- Limited by latency of protocol

- The ready signal in each case is a status flag

##Example of I/O Registers

- Keyboard:

KIN: Character ready to be sent status flag

KIRQ: Keyboard interrupt (later)

KIE: Keyboard interrupt enabled (later)

- Display:

DOUT: Ready to receive character

DIRQ: Display interrupt

DIE: Display interrupt enabled

- How does CPU figure out if you can read data in KBD? **Polling**: You have a program that reads the status register
and checks if KIN was set to 1 or not. If not then loop back and complete process again. Until it is one which it will
then read KBD data. 

## Polling for I/O on Read

- Program-controlled I/O implemented with a wait loop for polling keyboard status register.

## Example: Programmed-Controlled I/O

- Each keyboard character echoed to display


## Problem with Polling

- It's expensive - can't run another task while waiting for keyboard and display input. 

## Interrupts

- Interrupts cause a processor to deviate from the normal sequence of program instructions to allow the processor to respond to a high priority event

- Interrupts are serviced by a special subroutine known as an **interrupt service routine (ISR)** (interrupt handler):

- ISRs are small programs stored in the memory

- Different interrupts can have different ISRs
