# Specifying Operands

**Addressing Modes**: Different ways for specifying the locations of instruction operands

- The location of instruction operands are specified using an effective address

- The key thing to remember is that the effective address varies depending on the operand itself

## Addressing Modes

- There are many addressing modes - but the ones on the slides are the most basic

- This should allow you to go look and understand how different instruction sets work for the most part.

- Function is how you compute the effective address

## Immediate Addressing

- Immediate is for constants. Ex. Move R4, #NUM1 (You don't want to store constant in register)

- Example uses an immediate operand (move value 200 into register 0)

Ex. A program to compute A = [B] + 6 could be written in assembly language as follows:

### Say you have a 4-bit instruction. Only two instructions (add/subtract).

1 = ADD 0 = SUB

If he uses 3 bits how many numbers can he represent? 

1 (ADD) 0 1 0 (2) (using bits for the instruction to encode the value)

0 (SUB) 1 0 0 (4)

###Example:

LOAD R1, B - Absolute Addressing for B; Register addressing for R1
ADD R1, R1, #6 - **Immediate addressing for 6** Register addressing for R1
STORE R1, A - Register addressing for R1; Absolute addressing for A

##Register Addressing

- The address is just stored in the register. 

- Register addressing is used when an operand is a register

- We have already seen use of register addressing mode

##Absolute (Direct) Addressing

- The operand is stored in a memory location.

- When you know what the address for the memory location you want to access.

- How does instruction coding work? 

## Register Indirect Addressing

- Your first storing the address of #NUM1 to a register. Then you dereference it to get the actual contents.

- Used when the address of an operand is stored **in a register or a memory location**

- Example: Load R0, (R1) moves the contents of the memory location pointed to by register R1 to register R0. 

- First (R1) needs to resolve as an address (string of bits).

- What if you actually want to move contents of R1? You use the MOVE instruction. Source operand would be a register. 

- **Why does he use two square brackets?** We take R1 and whatever is in R1 and we use this to index the memory. **If we don't use square brackets would we just send the address?** Yeah.

- Ex. A pointer is an address - to figure out what is stored in the address - you de-reference it.

- Indirect addressing is analagous to the use of pointers (dereferencing) in a high-level language

## Summation Example

- He can't use LOAD to move NUM1 to NUM2 because he doesn't have the address of NUM2 but he can just increment NUM1 by 4 bits to move it to NUM2.

- By the end of course you should be able to take high-level C++ and translate it to assembly

- You increment by four because the assumption we're using byte-dressable so we're incrementing by the size of the integer.

## Index Addressing

- Used when the operand address is known to be at a constant offset from a known memory location

- Variant of register indirect

- Particularly useful for arrays of data

**How does an array work in C?** The base address points to the first element in the array. If you want to access the next index, you go ap + 4, second one is ap + 8. Effectively saying offset is nothing more than the index multiplied by the size of the int. 

## Aftermath

- Register is faster than memory (probably RAM)

#Lecture 2 

##PC-Relative Addressing

- For example, Move R0, -16(PC)

- pc relative addressing is very similar to index addressing: instead of index register - we use a program counter register. PC-relative addressing is useful for specifying addresses relative to the current program counter.

- relative addressing is most often used to specifiy the destination for branch instructions.

##Calculating Offsets for a Branch

- The assembler calculates a relative address for a branch automatically when given a label for the start of the loop.

##Auto Increment Addressing

- Retrieve the contents of R3 and load that into R2. Increment R3 for me (4 bytes depends on action e.g. LOAD).

- Inc will be 4 bytes if the load reads 4 bytes of the data

- Auto increment is similar to register indirect.
 
## Auto Decrement Addressing

- Similar to auto increment addressing:
- The difference is that the register is auto decremented in value prior to the data in the register being read

- This is sometimes called pre-decrement addressing

- E.g. Load R2, -(R3)

- Efficiency is important! Don't just write a script of whatever comes to mind.

## Stacks in General

- A stack is a list of data elements of a particular size with access restrictions:
- **Stack overflow:** use more memory than allocated into the stack.
- Last in first out! LIFO
- Stack resides in the main memory
- **Stack pointer** (special CPU register): points to the top of the stack, stored in the lowest memory address.
- **Push:** Data elements are pushed onto the stack
- **Pop:** Data elements are popped from the stack
- **If we had to push something on the stack?** I know where the top of the stack is. Substract 4 from stack pointer and then store at the address within the stack pointer register.
- **If we had to pop something on the stack?** A pop involves copying data from the location pointed to by the SP and then incrementing the SP
- Makes sense that it could stack overflow because if you keep substracting 4 from stack pointer from pushes it may run out of addresses to go to
- You can auto-increment the stack pointer

##Subroutines
- A subroutine is a block of instructions that is executed repeatedly
- Subroutines have the following desirable features:
  -Avoid unnecessary duplication of code
  –Permit code reuse
  –Enable modularization
- Subroutines do the following: **Program invokes subroutine by executing Call instruction–Subroutine executes–Subroutine returns to the main program by executing Return instruction**

## Calling and Returning from Subroutines

- Calling is implemented using subroutine linkage method
1. Save return address to a specific location -> may be stored on the stack -> but it may be stored in the link register

- **A Call is a special branch instruction that invokes a subroutine by performing the following steps:**

1. Store the contents of the PC to the link register

2. Branch to the target address specified by the instruction

**Returning from a subroutine performs the following step:**

1. Branch back to the address in the link register


