# Nesting Subroutines and the Stack 

- Call instructions are branch instructions that do a bit more

- Is the size of the link register the size of the stack? No the stack could be huge.

- A link register is just yet just another register -> dedicated to holding return addresses

- How many addresses will there be? Depends on ISA and implementation of ISA (typically 16 registers) some will be used for certain purposes.

- You have general purpose R's and special ones

- We allow for nested subroutines. If we only have one L.R. you will overwrite it.

- Solution: We use the stack as our temporary space. Before me our second call we want to save the contents of LR to stack. You'll read
it off the stack. A problem occurs if stack overflows. The second is if you don't maintain stack. You need to be diligent.

- Certain conventions are used to maintaining the stack. You want the compile to generate code for you.

## Parameter Passing

- Pass by parameter, memory, and on stack

- Registers are fast. Use them if you can. You can only pass a small number of arguements.

- Do you need to keep track of which register does what then?

- Is SP a keyword in the stack?

- The only way to access memory is with load and stores 

## Stack Frames

- Scratch space for the subroutine

- Spilling to the stack

- Performance Recommendation: You should make your subroutines short

- Registers are fastest storage medium on CPU

- Better than using stack and main memory

- You may be able to store all the intermediate values in registers (eg. add two numbers)

- But let's say you write a huge subroutine instead. If you have 32 registers you probably won't be able to do with 32 registers.

- This is why you'll need to spill over to the stack but that's not good. Just write shorter subroutines.

- We have a frame pointer -> accesses private workspace -> everything you have pushed on the stack prior to subroutine and in subroutine
you can access with stack free pointer

- Push arguements and return address
