# Interrupt Nesting

- Sometimes ISRs take large latencies for servicing higher priority devices

- Nesting allows a higher priority interrupt request to be processed during the execution of an ISR

- Most interrupts have a priority set with it and the one with the higher priority executes first

- When handling I/O, latency is critical (even assignment question to build hardware for that)

## Simulataneous Interrupt Requests

- When you're servicing an interrupt you may get another one - if it has higher priority then you do nesting

- Otherwise it just waits

- They can't happen at the same - true for all shared resources. You need to know who is serviced first - this
is called arbitration (which I/O device gets serviced first).

- However with vector interrupts - you must have dedicated hardware with arbitration logic to figure out which
one is higher priority.

- A priority encoder can be used to figure out which I/O device has higher priority

- Different arbitration policies: fair and unfair.

- There is some element of fairness (usually) in arbitration policies.

- vector interrupt is just a way of retreiving interrupt service address

## Finer Control of I/O Behaviour

- We kind of want to remember that when we process an interrupt we got an interrupt from something else

## Processor Control Registers

- IPENDING is similar to IA but it indicated if an interrupt has not yet been serviced - sort of like a pending.

- When you're working with these processors - you need special instructions. You need to be a certain mode of execution.

- You don't want a hacker to write assembly code to write over your PS

## Example 1 with One Interrupt: Reading a Line of Characters

- Use interrupts for keyboard to read characters

- Use polling within ISR to display

Why do we use storebyte? Notice the registers are by byte. If it were 32 bit then we would just use store.

- How does it know which byte to store?

```
STRB R2, ADDR.
```

- If ADDR is 0 you write to 0, if it was 1 you write to 1... and so on.


