# 1.3 Computation Graphs, Work, Span, Ideal Parallelism

Lecture Summary: In this lecture, we learned about Computation Graphs (CGs), which model the execution of a parallel program as a partially ordered set. Specifically, a CG consists of:

A set of vertices or nodes, in which each node represents a step consisting of an arbitrary sequential computation.
A set of directed edges that represent ordering constraints among steps.
For fork–join programs, it is useful to partition the edges into three cases:

1. Continue edges that capture sequencing of steps within a task.

2. Fork edges that connect a fork operation to the first step of child tasks.

3. Join edges that connect the last step of a task to all join operations on that task.

CGs can be used to define data races, an important class of bugs in parallel programs. We say that a data race occurs on location L in a computation graph, G, if there exist steps S1 and S2 in G such that there is no path of directed edges from S1 to S2 or from S2 to S1 in G, and both S1 and S2 read or write L (with at least one of the accesses being a write, since two parallel reads do not pose a problem).

CGs can also be used to reason about the ideal parallelism of a parallel program as follows:

- Define WORK(G) to be the sum of the execution times of all nodes in CG G
- Define SPAN(G) to be the length of a longest path in G, when adding up the execution times of all nodes in the path. The longest paths are known as critical paths, so SPAN also represents the critical path length (CPL) of G.

Given the above definitions of WORK and SPAN, we define the ideal parallelism of Computation Graph G as the ratio, WORK(G)/SPAN(G). The ideal parallelism is an upper limit on the speedup factor that can be obtained from parallel execution of nodes in computation graph G.
